---
layout: post
title: "What is Functional Programming?"
date: 2019-03-10 10:00
comments: true
published: true
tags:
    - scala
    - haskell
    - learning
    - functional
---

A question developers comming into Functional Programming, from other
paradigms, frequently ask is, "_What is Functional Programming?_".

This generaly leads to one of two responses.
Either "_It's programming with functions_", or it leads into a trip
down category theory.

The first answer doesn't seem that helpful, and it's often rebated with the
argument that in OO developers also program with functions. The second one, is
probably even less helpful as it tends to scare people and show FP as a dark
science.

What I'm going to try to do here, is correlate how first class concepts
of functional programming correlate with techniques that OO developers
are familiar with. So, this article is aimed at OO developers that want
an answer to the "_What is Functional Programming?_" question.

Next, I'm going to, step by step, describe some OO techniques that have become
popular through the last few years. Bear with me as this will lead us to the
core of what is FP.

# VOs and Entities

Tipically OO advocated for encapsulating data with behaviours inside of a
class. This meant that other classes depending on this data required the class
to expose some of its internals, leading to tight coupling between these
classes. It meant that now, all of these behaviours had to come attached even
if they weren't required, just because we needed some of the data encapsulated
by this other class. This also meant that changing the implementation details
of this class could break others that depended on their data.

Come Value Objects and Entities. Value Objects, are pure value representations
without associated exposed behaviours. Entities are very similar except by the
fact that they're data structures that have an identity that distinguishes
instances.
This meant that we now could have diferent parts of our systems depending on
these "data only" structures, without causing tight coupling to other system
behaviours. It also meant that those behaviour classes didn't need to expose
their internals anymore, so were better encapsulated.

Now that we've split our data from our behaviour, let's talk about another OO
concept that gained popularity in the last couple of decades.

# Programming to an interface

Although not directly related to the previous point, this yields the best
results when the previous technique is also in place. What this gives us is
polymorphism. Even though polymorphism is a concept that is mentioned
frequently in programming, I feel it's worth it to define the term here.
Polymorphism comes from the ancient greek, and means "assuming multiple
shapes". How this translates to programming with interfaces is that by
depending on interfaces, you can then provide multiple implementations for
that interface, and be completely implementation agnostic. This reduces
coupling, and encourages encapsulation (assuming you don't encode methods
exposing the internals in the interface).

At this point, because we've separated data from behaviours, our classes only
depend on data (VOs or Entities) and lists of methods (interfaces).

It's now time to introduce another concept that has gained a lot of popularity
in the OO community in the last few years.

# Interface segregation

What interface segregation says is, you should split the methods in your
interfaces into small interfaces and then assemble them into larger ones,
by having interfaces extending others. This means classes will depend strictly
on the methods that they require rather than depending on list of 20 methods when
the only need 1 or 2 of those methods.
If you take this segregation far enough, you will end up with a bunch of 1
method interfaces and implementations that depend on multiple interfaces for
composed behaviour.

So let's talk about another concept that is now widely used in OO programming,
called dependency injection.

# Dependency injection

For any of this to be of any use, implemntations of these composed interfaces
can't be created inside of your classes (well, they can and will, but in some
special classes that live at the boundary of your program, not in just any
class). So, you have to inject it. This basically means you have a part of
your system that orchestrates which implementations of these interfaces you
need, and then wire them together in a way that satisfy the interface
dependencies.

# So how does this relate to FP then?

In short, what I just described, is what FP is.

## Values

Functional languages usually provide some way to natively represent pure values.
In Scala this would be case classes and case objects, in Haskell these are just that,
values (In Haskell there's only the concept of values, no classes or objects).

## Segregated interfaces

If you think of functions as a type, for example a function that takes a
`Person` and converts it to a `String` would be a type `Person => String`, then, an
interface `Printable` with a single function that converts a `Person` to a
`String`, is just a way to name the type `Person => String`, because depending on
that interface means depending on that one function.

In Scala you could depend on the function type itself, or use a `trait` which
you can think of something akeen of an interface, or have a type alias for
`Person => String`. The last two ways would let you name the dependency, which
might be helpful to express intent.
Similarly, in Haskell you can either depend on the function type `Person ->
String` or define a type alias and name it for expressiveness.

## Dependency injection

Now, you make your functions depend on these types, and return these types,
and that is, in essence, what functional programming is.
In pure functional, injecting functionality as functions emerges naturaly, and
we'll be able to see more about that when we look into _expressions_ vs
_statements_.

# Wrap Up

Of course, there is a lot more to it, but in essence FP in OO terms is, dependency
injection with segregated interfaces and data/behaviour separation.

In the next installment, we'll be more focused on the paradigm specifics,
and will be talking about _expressions_ vs _statements_ and _functions_ vs
_procedures_. 

Next in this series: ["What is FP?" Part2](/articles/What-is-FP-Part2/)


